# Devlog #1 - Roll a ball, the Unity learn tutorial

I started by following the "Roll a ball" tutorial on Unity Learn. The tutorial felt approachable.

## Impressions

I wish the lessons where structured in a single easy to follow video, instead of being split into multiple short videos. It would have been easier to follow and would have consumed less time. The way it is, a lot of time is wasted on changing between videos, and the flow of the tutorial is disrupted.

Also the concepts could have been explained better, as at times it felt like I was just following instructions without fully understanding the underlying principles.

Other than that, I found the tutorial to be a good introduction to Unity and game development in general. I learned about the Unity interface, basic scripting, and how to create a simple game.

## Learnings

I liked how everything in the scene is a `GameObject` and how you can add functionality to it by stacking components on top. This part felt intuive and easy to do from the editor.

The modular nature of Unity is overwhelming when you want to work on a simple game or prototype. And having to re-compile the code every time you make a change is not ideal, so maybe it would have benefited from using a dynamic language.

While C# is a good OOP language, I found it confusing when using it with Unity. When you have for example a component, say a collider on your `GameObject`, to react on collisions you need to write a script that inherits from `MonoBehaviour`, when I'd expect to have had to implement a collider interface or inherit from a collider class. Then you need to implement the `OnCollisionEnter` method that is called by Unity when a collision is detected, and it is not an override of a method from `MonoBehaviour`, which is not intuitive at all. I understand that this is how Unity works, but I could not see the benefits of using an OOP language from this first tutorial, and also the components that are not representative of a real component system don't help with that.

I found the rendering pipeline a bit confusing, but I like the fact that you can customize it without having to write code, just by using the editor.

It seems a bit hard to get the environment to look good compared to other engines, but I think that more due to a lack of deeper understanding of the rendering pipeline and how to use it effectively, rather than a limitation of the engine itself.

When it came to the UI, I found it unintuitive and I still don't understand why the canvas is not overlayed on top of the game view, so you could easily see how UI elements would look in the game, instead of having to switch between the scene view and the game view. Also it feels like you have to many options, and choices like legacy vs new UI system are not explained well.

Communication between components seems reasonable coming from a C# background. Using references to other components is straightforward, and the fact that you can use the editor to set up these references is nice.

The input system, again, to many choices, why haven't they just gone with the new input system and made it the default? We will never know, but it seems like a missed opportunity to have a unified input system that is easy to use and understand.

## Conclusion

Overall, I think the tutorial is a good starting point for learning Unity, my main gripe is with the engine itself, not the tutorial. Having to install the Hub, then an engine that weighs several GBs, just to be presented with the same old clunky interface that has been around for years, and legacy systems deprecated but still present, is not a great first impression.
